We have seen Quicksort which is a divide and
conquer algorithm which overcomes the requirement
for an extra array as in merge sort. So, let
us do an analysis of Quicksort.
So, remember how Quicksort works, you pick
up a pivot element say typically this first
element of an array. And then what you do
is, you partition this into two parts such
that you have a lower part which is less than
or equal to p and may be an upper part, which
is bigger than p. And you move this pivot
in between and then you sort this lower part
and upper part separately recursively and
then you do not need to do any combining step,
because these two things are in the correct
position with respect to each other.
So, the first thing we observed is that this
partitioning actually is quite efficient.
We can do it in one scan of the entire array.
So, we can partition with respect to any pivot
in order n time. So, the question is how big
are the recursive problems? So, if the pivot
is a median then you would expect that by
definition of the median that these are of
size n by 2. Because, the median is that element
which splits the array into two parts, those
half of the elements are bigger than the median,
half are smaller than the median.
And if you do have this fortunate situation
that the pivot is the median, then we end
up with the merge sort recurrence which says
that t of n takes time 2 times t n by 2 for
the two parts and this is the partitioning
steps. So, it is not the merge step after
the recurrence, but the partitioning step
before the recurrence. So, we have as we saw
in merge sort, this recurrence takes order
n log n if we expand it out, but the pivot
is in some sense the best case.
What do we think is the worst case? Well,
the worst case is when the pivot is an extreme
value, either the smallest value or the biggest
value. So, if it is the smallest value then
what will happen is that everything will be
bigger than the pivot. So, you will have an
upper element set which has n minus 1 values,
because the pivot is the smallest value and
we will have nothing on this side. Symmetrically,
if the pivot is the largest value in your
array, then you will have everything in the
lower element set.
So, this is again size n minus 1 and the pivot
would be something which is on one extreme
end and there is nothing on the other side.
So, now what we see is that in order to sort
this array of size n, I have to then sort
a smaller segment which is only n minus 1
it no more smaller than n minus 1. So, I have
t n takes t n minus 1 plus n, n is the time
taken to partition and t n minus 1 again in
the worst case will have again a pivot element
which is an extreme value.
So, for example, supposing we start with an
already sorted array like 1, 2, 3, 4 then
what happens is that, we pick 1 as the pivot
and then this, this then results in us wanting
to sort 2, 3, 4 and then I will pick 2 as
a pivot and this results in us wanting to
sort 3, 4 and so on. If you have an already
sorted array in some sense, the pivot is always
an extreme value. So, the next step splits
the array very badly. And of course, if we
expand out this t n as t n minus 1 plus n,
we get the summation that we got for selection
sort and insertion sort. So, this becomes
order n square.
So, the worst case of Quicksort is actually
order n square, which is the same as the worst
case for selection sort and insertion sort.
So, why do we bother with this much more complicated
algorithm Quicksort, when we already know
several intuitive algorithms which are order
n square.
So, it turns out that Quicksort we can show
actually does not behave in this worst case
way in a very frequent manner. So, we can
actually compute in the case of Quicksort
what is called the average case complexity
and show that it is n log n. So, we will not
actually show that it is n log n, but we will
try to at least explain what it means to compute
the average case analysis of Quicksort. As
we said in the beginning, average case is
very difficult to compute. So, let us see
what it involves to do this.
So, the first reason why the average case
is difficult to compute is, because we need
to have a way of describing all possible inputs.
Now, even for a sorting algorithm all possible
inputs is an infinite space, supposing I just
take arrays of a fixed length, supposing I
take arrays of length 4. So, I could have
an array which looks like 43, 12, 38 and then
62. So, this is an array with 4 elements,
I could have another array of 4 elements which
is say 72, 21, 63 and 95.
But, in this way we can continue and put any
elements we want and there are infinitely
many arrays of size 4. But, there is a commonalty
between these, which says that the first element
is bigger than the second element. In fact,
the second element is the smallest element
and so, on. So, if we look at this we can
say that there are 4 elements and when we
think of them in order, then the smallest
element is here, the second smallest element
is here, the third smallest element is here
and the fourth smallest element is here. So,
I can actually think of this as the array
3, 1, 2, 4, it has 4 elements and the 4 elements
are ordered in this way.
So, the actual values are not important only
the relative order matters. So, we can actually
think of inputs of size n to be these kind
of re orderings of 1 to n or permutations
of 1 to n. Now, among these permutations we
do not have any preference, any one of them
would come as our input. So, we all know that
there are n factorial such permutations and
we say that each of them is equally likely.
So, each of them has probability 1 by n factorial
of occurring.
Now, we look at all these n factorial inputs
of size n and see how our algorithm behaves.
So, we will not do the actual calculation,
but if you see the average, you see the actual
time it is take for all the n factorial inputs,
add it up and divide by n factorial which
is what is in probability known as calculating
the excepted running time. Then, you can show
that this is actually order n log n.
So, we have not shown it, we have just explained
what is the mathematics required in order
to show this. But, in Quicksort you can prove
that the expected running time across all
possible random inputs equally likely inputs,
is actually order n log n. So, though Quicksort
has an O n squared worst case, on the average
it behaves like merge sort and without some
of the pit falls of merge sort, it particular
it does not requires the extra space in order
to create a merge array.
Now, you can actually exploit this average
case behavior in a very simple manner. So,
why does this worst case occur? The worst
case occurs, because the pivot that we choose
could be a bad pivot, as we saw if you put
the first element as your pivot, then a sorted
array becomes a worst case, because every
time the pivot is the extreme element. On
the other hand, you could take the last element
and you would have the same problem, if you
pick the midpoint again you can make the middle
point of the array that you start with the
extreme element and you can then work backwards
and construct always a worst case which takes
order n square.
So, what we are saying is that for any fixed
strategy, if I tell you in advance that I
am always going to compute the position of
the pivot in a fixed way, then by working
backwards you can always ensure that at that
position in the current problem, you have
a worst case that is an extreme input and
reconstruct something which will take O n
square for that strategy.
So, the solution is to not fix the strategy,
each time I want to apply Quicksort to a recursive
sub problem, I have some position 0 to n minus
1 which I need to pick as a pivot. But, rather
than telling you that it is going to be 0
or n minus 1 or the mid-way between 0 and
n minus 1, I will say that I will choose any
one of these values with equal probability.
So, think of it as, I am choosing a random
number between 0 and n minus 1 equally likely
or if you want to think graphically it is
like tossing or throwing a die. So, a die
has say six faces normally. So, if you roll
a fare die you get any number between 1 and
6 equally likely. So, now we have an n sided
die. So, we have a complex kind of object,
we throw it and whichever number comes up,
we pickup that as a pivot.
So, now the behavior of this algorithm is
not fixed, it depends on how this die rolls.
So, this is a different type of algorithm
called a randomized algorithm. So, you can
now implement Quicksort in a randomized way
with a very simple randomization step, namely
just pick the pivot at random at each call
to Quicksort. And it is turns out that again
you can do a similar calculation, saying that
across all the possible random choices I make
for the pivot, the expected running time is
order n log n. So, there is a very simple,
this is a kind of a dual result to the fact
of the average case is n log n, you can exploit
that by creating a very simple randomized
strategy in order to achieve this n log n
thing with good probability.
The other aspect that we mentioned about merge
sort, which is a bit limiting, is that it
is inherently recursive. Now, our solution
to Quicksort avoids this duplication of space,
but it is recursive. Now, it turns out in
Quicksort you can actually manually make the
recursive algorithm iterative. So, the point
is that the recursive calls works on disjoint
segments. So, what you need to remember in
the recursive call is not the entire segment,
but just what segment you need to work on,
you do not need to combine the results.
So, we will not discuss this in great detail,
but it turns out that you can use a stack,
you can actually maintain your own stack and
every time you make a recursive call, you
just store in the stack, the left and right
end point of what segment needs to be sorted.
And in this way you can actually take the
recursive algorithm that we wrote before and
convert it into an iterative algorithm. Now,
why you would like to do this in general list,
because you have a trade off in recursion
versus iteration depending on your programming
language.
Because, when you make a recursive call, when
you make a function call in general in a programming
language, what happens is the current function
that you computing has to be suspended. So,
you need to suspend and resume. So, when you
make a recursive call you have to put aside
whatever you have and then you have to take
a new set of local variables. So, in the memory
of the program you have to load some new data,
then you have to execute the function, when
it terminates, you have to throw that out
and restore the context, you have to resume.
So, this takes some time and it take some
resources and so, usually the cost of making
a function call, even though we might account
for it in our complexity as a basic operation
is much more than doing some really arithmetic
operation like addition or something. So,
in particular recursion every time you make
a recursive call, you are basically going
and replacing something on the stack with
some new frame and then putting it back and
this takes time.
So, it is in general sometimes for efficiency
purposes, good to convert recursion to iteration.
On the other hand, this process can make the
algorithm more obscure and many programming
languages actually or optimizing compilers
can try to do this automatically. So, may
be this distinction between recursion and
iteration does not always help so much. But,
it is useful to know that certain algorithms
can be done both ways and certain algorithm
it is difficult to do one way.
So, our final remark before we leave quicksort
for now. So, in practice Quicksort is very
fast, as we said the worst case happens very
rarely. For this reason, typically Quicksort
is the default algorithm that you see that
people use when you have a built in sort function.
So, if you have a spread sheet and allows
you to sort a column, then usually this algorithm
running in your background to sort that column
is Quicksort or if you have built in sort
function.
For example, C, C plus plus, java all allow
you to just call sort, even python just allows
you to just call sort. In almost any programming
language, the sort function that is available
to the programmer by just a simple call is
usually an implementation of Quicksort. Of
course, this implementation may use various
optimizations such as randomization and other
things to make it faster, but at the underlying
algorithm the heart of it is usually Quicksort.